Another month.
Alrighty. Let's see here.
Jackie, do you see that?
That's all there is. We have to turn the heated down.
That's all there is.
You say it hasn't been too cold out there?
Excuse me?
You say it hasn't been very cold out there?
No, not really. We had one slight fall of snow
about a week or more ago, and that was it.
It's kind of a handy place to be.
We're up at about 1800 feet, which is just below the snow line.
The snow line, we're in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada.
So we'd get pretty high.
But the snow line is something like, oh, 10 miles away.
Go up in the snow if you want, but you don't have it on top of you.
We're in the other direction. We're not that high from San Francisco.
Alrighty. I've got a technical problem on this end.
Alright, let's see if that cured it up.
What's that?
The loop.
Do we have a loop?
I don't detect one now.
Oh, yeah, I guess I still got one here.
Let's see if that got rid of it.
Is that better?
Nope.
Alright, now let's see if it's gone.
It's gone?
Yeah, it's gone. Count to five for me, please.
One, two, three, four, five.
Looks good.
Alrighty.
I get it right.
Yeah, we got it. We got it. We got it.
Test, test, test, test.
Test, test, test, test, test.
Alright.
Alrighty.
You said it hadn't been too cold out there, didn't you?
Right here?
Yeah.
No, it's been very mild here.
Okay.
We, uh...
When we first arrived, we, uh...
We thought it was a little chilly.
Until we heard that Orlando had minus 29 the previous night.
And then we didn't feel it was chilly.
Okay, we've got the tape recorder rolling.
Just one more time if you'd count to three for me, please.
Oh, how about one, two, three?
One, two, three. Looks good.
I'm not getting a little louder.
That's the way it's supposed to be.
I think a little louder if this is faint.
No, that's pretty good.
We're far and beyond where we were as far as audio recording goes.
Now we do all sorts of mixing and jump with this in the studio
after we get through recording it.
I have every confidence in American media.
Good.
Alright, we're gonna go ahead and get started.
Okay.
Okay. Alright.
How did you get interested in writing?
It was too long ago to remember.
When I left school at...
when I was 16 and wanted to be a writer then,
I guess it was something that I always enjoyed doing as a kid at school.
You know, the essays and the story writing exercises you get.
And when I left school I told the world I was gonna be a writer.
And you could think of a good idea until somebody said,
well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience of 16 years,
what are you gonna write about that the world is breathlessly waiting to hear?
And I hadn't thought about that.
The answer was not a lot.
So I went away into engineering and electronics and computers and things like that
for something like 20 years.
And I suppose the interest in writing probably never went away.
And 20 odd years later, that situation had changed a lot.
I'd spent a lot of that time.
I started off as an electronics engineer and then a computer designer
and then went into selling computer systems.
And not the blue boxes you see at work that print out payrolls and things.
I'm not talking about business computers,
but the real-time scientific systems that might go into scientific research laboratories
are connected up to instruments to collect all the data
and turn them into pictures on screens.
And the sort of computers you'd find in particle accelerator installations
or observatories.
In other words, all my customers were scientists, physicists, biologists, chemists, and so forth.
And the kind of system we're talking about ranged up to several million dollars.
And when somebody's buying a system of that size,
it's not the kind of thing that you sell in a one-half hour sales call
and say, sign the paper, you're frequently working with them for 12, maybe 18 months
before a contract is finalized.
During that time, you have to try and understand a lot of what they're doing
in terms of to be able to put together and recommend the right sort of system for their needs.
In other words, you get to know a little bit of what they're all doing.
And I found it fascinating, a fascinating world that they lived in.
You also get to know them socially, how they think, how they take, what makes them laugh.
Very interesting as people.
And I found 20 years later that there were a lot of interesting things to put here
to write about and form the basis of stories.
So I didn't particularly set out to be a science fiction writer.
I suppose I became one by accident.
I just always wanted to write and started writing stories about the little bit of life
that I'd had some personal experience of and was told I was a science fiction writer.
And I said, how's that?
They said, well, the publisher is publishing it under their science fiction input.
So we guess you have to be so I said, OK.
And it kind of started out like that.
OK. Could you hold for just a second here?
I've got to take care of a slight flutter in one of my machines.
OK. Hang on. I'll be right back with you.
Still here.
OK. You've covered a lot of the background already.
Is there a problem?
I'm just getting a funny scraping noise off of real type.
So it's not going to be really picking up anyway.
So we'll just leave it.
Are we going away?
No, it's sitting there just scraping away.
But the heck with it.
You've covered a lot of the background stuff, like I said.
So I'll think I'll go right into some other stuff.
Associating with the scientists as you were, I guess that gave you a lot of the background material that you use in your stories.
Yeah.
Well, that provided more to trigger.
The stimulation to take an interest in that kind of work, I guess reading provided a lot of it.
But that kind of material is easy to read when you have a vested interest in understanding it,
because you have business relationships that will profit from that understanding.
In other words, it's reading with a purpose, a clear-cut purpose rather than just out of curiosity.
It's a way of dealing with the idea of a way of killing time.
But luckily it became a little more than that.
Do you usually do a lot of back-up here?
Most of your stories, I guess, would be called hard science fiction.
Yeah.
Do you do a lot of research whenever you do write a story?
Yeah, I do.
I suppose I read quite a lot, and I suppose the bulk of my reading is nonfiction.
So even casual reading in a way becomes what might be termed non-specific research.
In other words, information that just gets stored away and comes out later,
although I didn't study it for any particular reason at the time.
But while I was, before I became a full-time writer, I was still working in the computer business.
I used to, I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants, which was kind of handy.
I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other customers who studied pieces
of rock brought back from the Apollo missions and other guys who were building in,
or investigating machine intelligence.
And just about any of the topics, or the favorite themes of science fiction that you could take out of a hat,
the chances were sort of not 10 to 1, I had a customer specializing in that field.
And I just had to, if I needed some background information on a particular topic,
I could almost guarantee I had a phone number in my diary as a guy who could talk all day about it.
And they love doing it as well, I used to call them and they'd say,
I'd like to come and talk to you tomorrow.
Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about?
Oh, I need some help with the book I'm working on.
Well, why didn't you say so? What times do you want to show up?
And they talk all day.
And I think this is one of the interesting sides of selling computers into this kind of area.
You can imagine some of these specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long or whatever
and they end up shutting the back rooms of universities.
And maybe there are four people on the planet they can talk to who understand their language.
And sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the world outside that has walked in off the street
is sincerely interested to sit down and talk to them and is curious and he wants to know what they're doing,
wants to have it explained.
And it was a very pleasant way to work a living.
You not only gain customers, in many instances I found you gain friends as well.
It's a very pleasant combination to build a life around where the things you like doing,
the kind of work that you like to do, the kind of activity that you like to do is also part of a process
of making friends and not only that somebody is prepared to pay you to do it.
I found that a very pleasant situation.
Your first novel, in fact I believe it was the first thing that you wrote was In Hair of the Stars, wasn't it?
Yes it was.
It's a science fiction detective story.
Yes.
How did you come to write that book?
Well, I think that sums it up pretty well.
It reflects I think the way I see science which is indeed as a wonderful, ongoing, never-ending detective story.
And I suppose I got a little bit dissatisfied with some of the depictions of science and scientists that I'd seen in fiction.
I found the impression or the suspicion in some cases that perhaps the people who had written some of the fiction
certainly would perhaps not have worked in a scientific field or spoken to a scientist for a long, long time
and maybe generations of people had reinforced each other's cliches.
And scientists were always eccentric and they wore odd colour shoes and they drew cabbages that ate people
and they wanted to conquer the world or something.
And there are these kind of cute public impressions of scientists as people who run down the street with no clothes on, shouting Eureka
or have you read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on
and what came to him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20 years.
And real science, there are insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes,
a lot of people doing nothing really dramatic or exciting but just meticulously sifting through details and collecting information.
For generations and for centuries, all different parts of the world and it's really like putting together a huge jigsaw puzzle,
lots of people cutting out pieces and twisting them round and every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner
and see that it fits with a huge chunk down there and that's a breakthrough.
And so it goes on and it really is a detective story.
I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective fiction.
And I wanted to write a story that attempted to depict it in this kind of way and hopefully would convey some of the excitement that personally I feel when I look at this whole thing.
I believe so.
I think that, I thought that, yeah, let's make it a detective story, but if we want a detective mystery that is going to be sufficiently intriguing
to motivate the large proportion of the scientific community as happened in Inherit the Stars,
we want something a little more original and exciting than bodies in the library or footprints in the flower bed.
So we invented Charlie and the aliens and the rest I suppose you know.
Basically it was an attempt to depict science as it is or at least as I perceive it.
And at the same time we've added into a story that people who were non-scientists, non-specialists would find stimulating and rousing to the curiosity
even if without trying to turn it into a 250 page lab report or something like that.
Yeah, I believe, I don't know if I'm reading this into your work or not, but some of what I'm feeling is that your writing is sort of almost a celebration of learning, the learning process.
Yes, I think it's one of the most exciting processes anybody can experience.
I think it's very sad that in large sections of our culture we should have evolved the attitude that learning is something you endure until you leave school
and then it ceases with that or I think education and living are just different aspects of the same process that never ends.
In the minds of a lot of people the two teams seem to have separated out and for some reason learning is looked upon as hard work
and unpleasant and something that you steer clear of unless you can't avoid it.
I think that's very, very sad.
No reason why it should be so, I think it's just a consequence of cultural expectations.
A lot of people expect it to be hard work and tedious and sure enough it is.
In your stories I've noticed that you really flesh out the futures that you create with a lot of detail.
I lost my question.
You were saying about the future.
Yeah, let me just rephrase it here.
I notice in your stories that you really fleshed them out with a lot of detail.
Does that simply just make the story more realistic?
I don't know if there's any particular purpose in doing that.
I try and use as much detail as I feel is needed to convey whatever meaning I'm trying to convey at that particular part of the book.
In fact, some parts I got over very quickly because there's really not a lot to say.
I don't know if you have any specific examples in mind that we could talk about more particularly.
I think the short answer is I simply make descriptions, etc. as detailed as I feel they need to be to say what I want to say.
I was remembering one particular instance when Hades traveling from England to the United States
and he opens up his briefcase and plugs in his video phone to the plane and makes this long distance call right there.
It seems so natural that it just creates a very realistic atmosphere for your story.
Yeah, I like to do things like that.
I see what you mean by detail now.
I think these kinds of details do matter because if we're putting a story into a futuristic setting,
I think the little details of background such as if the guy needs to make a phone call, how does he go about it if he needs to render CAD,
these matter because if the story is being told in the future, the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic.
I've come across a number of instances which in my opinion are a little flawed because I've dealt with an AW.
A writer may have seized on a particular thought, maybe a new scientific idea or a machine or whatever,
develops that very well but kind of gets hung up on it and in the background everything else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980.
I think just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to think about a situation.
The guy's going to make a phone call just like stop and think how he might make that and think about it for five minutes
and then maybe show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to do in the first couple of seconds.
It's worth the effort, I don't think it radically changes the story but it does give it that finishing polish as it were at least in that sense.
I try to do this in all the stories and I find the readers like it.
I think the people who write to me and the people that I meet, one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that
it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader who buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstores.
I suppose people who might be termed younger professional people in their late 20s, 30s, 40s in all manner of professions not necessarily to do with the scientists, teachers, lawyers, doctors, so forth
who typically would say gee I used to read science fiction when I was at college or when I was at university but I kind of grew out of it.
I can't relate to the way out galaxies light years away anymore or aliens running around with ray guns.
Today I have a family, a career, a mortgage, my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet.
But they seem to like stories that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now but maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years.
And they find names in the book like IBM and Papers and Boeing, familiar places and grabs them.
They say well this I can relate to it's the world that I live in just stretched a little bit.
The connection is not broken, the economics and the politics have evolved and what I read in the papers I can still see the connections.
And it could be the world my kids go up in and I like it.
And if it has that effect on that far off the market of readership then I'm perfectly happy to continue doing that in addition to the reason that I enjoy the stories better myself for doing that.
I wouldn't be misreading and saying you're an optimistic person would I?
I think I am.
And notice your stories tend to be rather optimistic.
Sure, why not?
Good question, why not?
I think there's enough doom and gloom around I try and contribute something to counterbalance all that. I think it's needed.
You probably would hold a great hope for the human potential then.
Excuse me, I missed the question.
You probably would hold a great hope for the human potential.
Oh I think it's unlimited. It doesn't guarantee we'll use it correctly and wisely at all. There's no guarantee of that but I have no doubt that the potential exists and the choice is entirely up to us.
And I think that in itself is grounds for optimism. It means that we're not pawns that are pushed around by fate or magical, mystical forces that we have no control over our future.
I think that would be a very depressing thought.
I think it underlies a lot of the philosophies that we hear astounded.
I want to excuse to quit trying to write everything off as futile.
I don't subscribe to this at all. I think that in the same way that the individual future lies in his or her hands and I think they have infinite potential to build upon.
I think the only resource that we're short on in some quarters is positive thinking and the right attitude of mind.
Nothing else. And I think collectively the same is true.
I think that there is a human tendency to be too conscious of our failings and our faults and our mistakes which have happened.
It would be silly to deny that.
But I think by and large we've achieved some remarkable and wonderful things as well and continue to do so.
And I think when I look at the bottom line of the balance sheet, I'm pretty proud to be a member of the human race.
Okay. We're just commenting on here. I happen to agree with you.
Could you hold for just a second here? We're going to shut the machine down.
Zero just said go ahead and continue. He just stopped and I had just stopped the machine to find out what it was that he said.
That was sort of redundant on my part. Okay. Machines crank back up and.
We're rolling again.
Okay. In your novel, Thrice Upon a Time, you base the story around a device that can send messages back in time to itself 24 hours in the past.
And then by that process just keep sending it back to itself and back to itself.
I've been reading recently about several scientists who are speculating about real possibilities of time travel.
Yeah.
Was your novel, your novel really was written before those came out. It's sort of prophetic in a way.
Maybe that's where they got it from.
Well, I don't know whether it's prophetic or not.
Well, as is elaborated in the book itself, if something like that ever became a fact, there are some pretty interesting problems that are going to have to be solved.
And our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty interesting revisions.
So I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet saying yes, it'll happen.
Maybe I don't know. I think history has shown that impossible or it'll never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context.
As far as I was concerned, it was just a fun basis for a story, certainly not an original one.
Although I did, I was trying, I don't suppose any of the things I've written about have been original in essence.
I'd try and approach them from hopefully fresh and different angles.
But for some time, for a number of years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice Upon a Time, I'd been wanting to write a timeshap or book for a number of reasons.
Firstly, I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes, once and for all, and answer them without top-outs, without convenient coincidences,
and without obliging characters who just happened to do the right thing to make everything come out the way the author said.
And secondly, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind of a conjurer's box, described or described as whatever,
that you jump into and you jump out of and you're in some other time.
We seem too many conjurer's boxes and it seemed to me unrealistic that if I ever built a box like that and I thought it was going to take me to another time,
I certainly would jump into it and press the button.
I mean, I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments first and none of that here I was ever thinking to do this.
And it seemed to me reasonable to say if we're going to make the speculation of influencing the past, it seemed to me to be reasonable to speculate
that if we're going to make that assumption anyway, that before we move structured objects and people back into another time,
we probably learn how to inject energy first.
And if you can send energy back in time, you can obviously switch the energy on and off and modulate it and send information.
In other words, you can send messages to yourself if you like.
I didn't want it to be a million years or a billion years or some huge span of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference.
How about a lab bench experiment, ten minutes?
You can just send a little signal back to yourself ten minutes ago and change what you've already done.
This is interesting. You're hard up against the paradoxes now.
You can't find a way around them or duck them.
You've got to answer the question, what happened?
The logic of the whole situation becomes absolutely...it drives you to the point of insanity trying to figure it out.
I found the only way to do it was to think in terms of the simplest possible lab bench experiment that you could devise and strip away all the complications
to just get the logic right and then elaborate it back up to the level that would make a story interesting.
The simplest situation that you can think of is a button and a lamp.
When you push the button, the lamp comes on. It couldn't get much simpler than that.
The only different thing here is the lamp comes on ten seconds before you press the button because the signal goes back in time.
The question is obvious, what happens? I wait until the lamp comes on.
Ten seconds later it's time to press the button. It's not going to press it. Nobody could make me.
I didn't want mystical forces compelling people to do something they didn't want to do.
I wanted to preserve human free will. So what happens? I don't press the button.
Conversely, I can say, well, the lamp didn't come on, but I'm going to press the button anyway.
What happens? So those are two situations, one being the inverse of the other.
If you can explain what happens, you can answer any time travel paradox because every one is an elaboration of one of those situations or the other.
It's not good enough to, for example, wait for the lamp to come on and say,
hey, what's this? Press the button. That doesn't get you out of it because, you're a scientist, you're going to repeat your experiment under conditions where that could happen.
You lock the door and set it up again. You go out of the room and have the computer press the button.
But eventually you would test it time and time and time again and if accidents happened that got you out of a mess for the first time, you could eliminate them the next time.
And eventually you have to face up to that question, what happens? That's what I wanted to do.
And the third thing I wanted to do was to tell a story in which the time machine itself and the staggering conceptual changes in physics and philosophy that are implied are relevant to the story that's being told.
There's an integral part of it. If you took them away, there wouldn't be any story.
I think in too many stories, time machines are used like Starships. They're just a device, a vehicle to get some characters into an unusual environment and then tell a pretty routine story that would stole them from Greek mythology or European medieval history.
And the technology doesn't come into the story at all. They could have gone the on a greyhound bus.
I didn't want to do that. And so the story was about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had realized that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant, it meant that they could actually inject information into the past and change the past with all the questions that implied.
And being proceeded to test this phenomenon and the pains and very, very strange results.
And yet they're convinced that behind all this there is some consistent system of super logic that does make sense and they're trying to figure out the rules of it.
And of course there's an unspoken or unwritten invitation for the reader to participate.
And again, I suppose it's a kind of a detective story. Not so much of who's done it, but how is it done to see if the reader can figure out the rules before the characters do?
It is something that I noticed when I was reading the novel is that there are no unresolved paradoxes in it. You do sew them all up neatly before the end of the novel.
Well that was one of the goals of writing the book. And I think it worked.
The people who seem to know what they're talking about and have commented are pretty satisfied. So that made me pretty satisfied.
There are a couple of silly things in there which don't really affect the physics of the time machine.
There was a big fusion planned up in Scotland and I don't know why due to a lapse of concentration on my part in one chapter it had moved to another part of Scotland.
We'll fix that when the book's next reprinted. There was an eagle eyed Scotsman wrote to me and picked that out.
It started off on the soul way first and ended up on the Murray first or the other way round. I got it on the wrong first in one chapter.
Well maybe for one of your future novels you'll have to explore matter transmitters.
Yeah, yeah well it's a...
Yeah that's another possibility. I did explore that in a short story I wrote called Assassin which was in the Stella anthology series. Stella number four.
This was exploring the possibility of matter transmission and of course people.
You can instantly get somebody from here to there but in fact what appears there is a copy of them so you've now got two of them.
If the other one decides to come back the same way you're getting rapidly multiplying problems literally.
Stella Assassin was a story that played around with that book.
I must have missed that one.
Since Stella four it came out a couple years ago.
Okay. You've written a sequel to the Inherit the Stars called the General Giants of Ganymede.
Did you intend to follow the story in Inherit the Stars with a sequel or was it from Reader Demand or what?
A bit of both. When I wrote Inherit the Stars I had three books in mind. I had a trilogy in mind.
So I put the hooks in...although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself.
It didn't leave the reader hanging. It started and told and finished a story.
Nevertheless there were a couple of hooks in there that invited some questions which were paved the way to a follow up book.
My thinking at the time was I'll go that far but I won't write the second book until I have some feedback as to how the readers liked the first one.
I got a lot of mail and they all liked it and a lot of them said in their letters will there be a follow up?
They picked out the hooks. So I wrote the General Giants.
And they wanted another one and I did have a trilogy in mind when I wrote it.
And the third one in that series is now written. It's called Giant Star and it will be...it's a July title.
So it should start to appear in the bookstores around June.
It's the third and last. There won't be any more in that series.
So it ties up a few of the loose ends. Tells another story.
Continues with the characters we met in the previous two books.
Both the Terrestrial and the Ae of Characters and introduces some new ones.
And I don't think there can be a fourth one because I don't think there's any more to be said. It wraps it all up.
Are you working on any new projects?
I'm working on the...as I say, Giant Star will be out in June-July.
And I'm currently working on the one after that.
Which I don't have a title for yet because I always think of the title as last.
And I don't know when it'll be on sale because I don't know when I'll finish it.
Probably sometime this spring.
What type of story is it without giving away any of the plot details?
Well, it's...how can we sum it up?
It's...permissive.
Well, the background to the story is that we're in the second half of the next century.
And some decades previously, in other words, in about...about around the year 2020,
a robot star probe was sent out.
Programmed to tour a number of stars and simply to search for habitable planets and generally explore.
Send down surface probes, atmospheric probes, things like that.
Radio everything back.
And the political situation on Earth was looking very, very grave at that time.
I am an optimist but I can still invent rule of all three scenarios for a story, though it's fiction after all.
The optimism may turn out to be unjustified yet.
But towards the closing years of this project, in other words, obviously you don't build a ship like that overnight,
and when it was well along the way towards being completed, it was modified to be capable of making people.
Let me qualify that as a strange thing to say.
We'll read a lot of stories about starships that go on long voyages that take maybe centuries
and inevitably they've got frozen bodies or bodies in suspended animation or something like that.
But when you think about it, it seems rather an inefficient way to send...you know,
you're not doing anything, the machines can fly the ship, the computers can get it there.
The people aren't doing anything about...except, you know, just lying there freezing.
So, you know, why not let the machines fly the ship and make the people when you get there?
If we look at the progress made in molecular biology and genetic engineering in the last couple of decades,
we already manufactured quite complex organic molecules to specifications such as drugs and certain anaesthetics.
If we just extrapolate that a little further, it's to say you couldn't make a complete set of human DNA.
In other words, instead of sending bodies and all the support equipment to freeze them and taking up all the space,
why not just store all the genetic information necessary to make people electronically in the computers
and create them when you have found the planet that the instruments say they could survive on?
And, you know, let's imagine for a sake of argument that ten light years away you found the planet.
Well, if the robot ship got there and sent back a signal saying, started the experiment,
well, ten years later the signal gets to Earth.
And even if they responded instantly, the ship's been in orbit for twenty years doing nothing,
just waiting for a reply.
Well, the ultimate test of whether or not a planet is inevitable is to set up a colony and try it.
And so we could have used those twenty years.
So here is the interesting possibility of a race that evolves from a first generation of embryos
that were created and nurtured and raised by computers and robots, a machine-raised race.
And when you think about it, the relationship between the children and the machines does not really have to be a cold
and sinister one at all.
It could be quite a charming and amusing one.
And the interesting thoughts that the book starts to play with is, here is a race of kids that are being raised by
some very rational, direct, down-to-earth entities who don't double talk or deceive
or have all these layers of human game-playing that we have to contend with.
And they're being raised completely without any exposure to the conditioning of conditioned adults
with their prejudices and hatreds and taboos.
And a lot of the other nonsense is that make life so complicated in our society.
And also, they're not a primitive society, they're a very high-technology society.
They arrive with some of the most advanced equipment and technology ever devised.
While they were in orbit and growing up serenity, the machines were down on the surface,
preparing surface bases, manufacturing facilities and industries and so forth.
So by the time they actually enter adolescence and the races, the generations I should say,
that follow thereafter, all of their material needs are provided by highly automated means.
In terms of their productivity relative to their numbers, everyone is a millionaire.
And let's imagine that a mission from Earth eventually shows up.
Virtually, you know, a big mission. This is usually a 20-year voyage, maybe.
So we're talking about a spaceship that maybe houses 20,000 people,
a space colony with engines, with its government, its military, its church organizations,
its commercial institutions, the whole of society in miniature with its time-proved mechanisms
for controlling and subordinating a population.
Which traditionally, a ruling elite through history is imposed itself by restricting the flow of wealth
and by offering protection either from real or imagined threats.
But how do you control a race of millionaires who don't need your wealth
and the idea of restricting anything has never occurred to them?
Of restricting the supply of anything. They don't need you to protect them from anybody.
And none of the tricks or the psychology or the scare tactics work.
So what happens when a race of machine-raised people eventually collides with a race with people-raised people?
And that's really what the story is all about.
Alright, let's hold for just a second. Crank the machine back up here.
Okay.
Shut the machine back up.
Okay, I'll go ahead and ask the question and then we'll just splice this into this show when we do it.
In your novel, Two Faces of Tomorrow, you explore the future of machine intelligence.
How far away do you think we might be from intelligent computers?
I don't know that I have an answer to that.
Two Faces was not intended to be prophetic in any way.
Nothing that I write in the fiction sense is I simply sketch possibilities of what might be, not predictions of what will be.
Putting a time limit on it, it's an awkward thing to be asked to do.
I'm sort of thinking about this.
My mind is going back over the number of confident predictions that have been made in the past on various topics that proved disasterously wrong either one way or the other.
But I see no reason in principle why artificial systems of some kind, not necessarily what we'd call computers.
In other words, electronics of some form inside a box of some form.
But simply man-made systems should not in principle be capable of all of the feats that are performed by the human mind.
In other words, thinking in the sense that we normally use the word and all its connotations in everyday conversations.
We have a system already in existence, a physical system that can think the human brain itself.
We could turn the question around a little and say if the human brain is a physical system that can think, is there any reason to suppose that some other system shouldn't be capable of doing likewise?
And I see my answer is absolutely no reason why not.
I don't see anything unique that sets the human brain.
The question really becomes metaphysical.
I think the question what lurking behind or beneath the surface of this whole debate is do we feel that the human mind can be adequately accounted for by the familiar laws of physics and no more?
Or does the phenomenon of mind require something extra, some life force, some mystical agency and so on, all of what you like?
And depending how we answer that question I think that will shape our answer to the artificial intelligence issue.
Personally, I feel that the human mind requires nothing extra to account for it.
To that being so, there's no reason why an equally complex system that happened to have come from some other origin than natural evolution.
In other words, having been conceived and built by human beings shouldn't be capable of the same thing.